- [Instructor] The List interface
and its implementations are the next group
of collections that we'll explore.
Within this group,
we'll find some of the most frequently used classes in Java,
like an ArrayList and a LinkedList.
Lists are very helpful because they allow us
to store an ordered group of the elements
and provide a set of methods for working
with those elements by their position
in the structure using random access.
An elements position is specified
by using a zero-based index,
which is similar to how we work with an array.
On the type hierarchy of the list,
there are four basic implementations.
Most Java developers consider the Vector and Stack types
that came before collections to be obsolete.
So we'll only dive deeper into the ArrayList
and the LinkedList implementations.
In this type hierarchy,
you'll notice some crossover between the LinkedList
and the hierarchy of the Queue interface.
That's because the LinkedList
implements the Deque interface.
This relationship causes some additional methods
to appear on the LinkedList
that are not found on the ArrayList.
Of the two, the ArrayList implementation
is the most frequently used.
As its name implies, it is internally backed by an array.
This array is created with an initial capacity
upon instantiation of the list.
If we exceed the initial capacity of the internal array
when adding a new element,
the ArrayList automatically resizes
by creating a new, larger array
that holds the new and existing elements.
Operations that add or remove an element
in the middle of the array list
will automatically adjust the position
of the remaining elements in its internal structure.
It does this by copying them to their new indexes.
This can have performance implications
if we need to insert many elements
into the middle of a large ArrayList.
However, reading or retrieving an item
from the ArrayList is relatively fast
since we can use random access
to get an element by its position.
The LinkedList implementation uses a doubly linked list
as its internal structure instead of an array.
It uses nodes that contain references
that link objects together into a sequence
that forms the LinkedList.
Each node in the list holds an element,
a reference to the next element,
and a reference to the previous element.
The ends of this internal structure will point
to a null reference in memory.
This is how we can tell if we're at the end of the list.
So when an element is added to the LinkedList,
the original references are broken.
Then new references are established
to point to the new next and new previous elements.
The same re-linking process occurs
when we remove an element from the LinkedList.
In some situations,
it provides better performance for these operations.
This makes adding elements
into a LinkedList relatively fast
because we can just re-point the nodes references.
However, a LinkedList is not ideal
for retrieving an element.
That's because we need to traverse all of the references
that proceed the element that we want to access.
Unfortunately, there's not a silver bullet
for choosing a list implementation.
It's going to depend on which methods you use the most
and the number of elements that are in it.
Now, most developers will lean heavily towards
the ArrayList and some developers will even question
if we need the LinkedList.
So here's my advice.
Start with an ArrayList
and use the List interface as your variable type.
Then if you encounter performance issues,
you can just change up the implementation later.